leg hematoma:

1/2025 is the start. Presented to urgent care with R leg swelling. 22y/oM. 

Patient presents to clinic for evaluation of right leg swelling and pain since last night. Is paraplegic and has decreased sensation in lower extremities but states he feels a 10/10 pain from low back, to his right hip, and down his right leg. Slid off the couch 2 weeks ago, lightly fell onto floor onto buttocks but did not have pain or swelling until last night. States leg also feels hot to touch.  Reports history of muscle spasms in his legs but now worse. States his PCP was concerned for possible blood clot, knee injury, or infection and advised him to be seen. Denies history of blood clot. 

Visit Vitals



 

 

Physical Exam

Musculoskeletal: 

   Comments: Generalized edema right thigh & right knee. Right knee with warmth and small area of erythema. ROM/sensory/strength exam limited as patient is paraplegic.  



Pain and swelling of right lower extremity

 

 

-Patient referred to ED for higher level of care & pain management. Would benefit from r/o DVT, infection, MSK injury, etc.

-Patient agreeable with plan



Brief HPI: 22 y.o. male presents complaining of Leg Swelling (Right leg swelling from pelvis to knee. Patient admits to pain. )

Patient with history of paraplegia presents with right quadriceps pain and firmness along with some swelling.  He noticed it this morning.  He goes down to his knee.  He reports subjective fever.  He denies chest pain or shortness of breath.

 

Pertinent Exam: Right quadriceps is full and mildly firm, but compartments are easily compressible.  No overlying erythema, induration, or warmth.

 

Brief Assessment: Right quadriceps pain and fullness



22-year-old male with past medical history of T9 paralysis status post GSW, anxiety, depression, wheelchair-bound, presents to ER complaining of right knee and thigh pain x 2 weeks. Reports falling onto flexed to right knee. Reports swelling to right knee that has subsided over the last 2 weeks. Additionally reports pain and bruising to right thigh but admits to punching his thigh when having spasms. Takes baclofen for spasms. Denies fevers, nausea, or vomiting. No other complaints at this time. 



Musculoskeletal:    

   General: No swelling or deformity. Normal range of motion. 

   Cervical back: Normal range of motion and neck supple. 

   Right knee: Swelling and effusion present. No deformity, erythema or ecchymosis. 

   Right lower leg: No edema. 

   Left lower leg: No edema. 

   Comments: Ecchymosis noted to medial aspect of proximal thigh 



Medical Decision Making

Assessment

Right thigh and knee pain status post trauma

 

Differential diagnosis

Fracture versus dislocation versus ligamental injury versus meniscal injury versus not likely DVT

 

Plan

X-ray knee

 

DVT ultrasound from previous day reviewed.  No acute findings or DVT noted.

 

 

IMPRESSION:

Small suprapatellar soft tissue effusion and soft tissue swelling which is nonspecific. No acute osseous abnormality.

 

Patient advised he possibly has a ligamental or meniscal injury status post trauma.

Advised to follow-up with PCP for possible MRI.

Proximal and prescribed

 



SAW us 1 day after ER visit

Physical Exam Findings



 

I personally visited with and examined the patient. My focused evaluation was notable for: Laying on exam table in no acute distress. Some swelling of R knee compared to L. Mild warmth. No marked erythema or rash. Scant ecchymosis of R inguinal area at site of where DCT ultrasound done. No hematoma. Good inguinal and DP pulses on R. Able to ROM the knee without issue. 

POCUS done and without evidence of significant effusion in the suprapatellar recess.

 

The patient presents today for the follow-up of the following diagnosis(es) and my comments about the case are as follows: 

Etiology of knee swelling unclear. Favor non-specific MSK injury related to fall from wheelchair a week or so back. However, has rf for less forgiving tissue so may need advanced imaging to further clarify bony vs tendinous/ligamentous issue. Main decision tree at this time if it represents inflammatory monoarthritis or NOT. Lower suspicion based off POCUS today but has rf for gonorrhea. As such, get labs to help triage. If any concerns arise on them or labs not done, would treat empirically for gonorrhea (would need IM/IV treatment). Discussed ER precautions. 

 

Remainder of plan of care per resident note.

 

Follow-up timeframe: 1-2 weeks (5 week increments)

 

We will continue being the long-term focal point of care for this patient (G2211 for non-annual visits).

Patient seen with resident with GC modifier.

Austin C. Rezigh, MD



Brief HPI:  Alberto Aguirre Jr. is a 22 y.o. male with PMHx paraplegia d/t GS2 05/2021, muscle spasticity, neurogenic bowl, neurogenic bladder.  who presents for follow up of chronic conditions.

 

#Right Knee Effusion, undifferentiated

#Right Inner thigh bruise 2/2 trauma vs. Technical ultrasound effect

#Paraplegia, T9 downward with motor/sensory deficits 2/2 gunshot wound (2021)

#Neurogenic bladder 2/2 paraplegia (2021)

#Chronic Spacisticity

#Unprotected Sexual Activity

#Hx of drug use

- The patient reports that he noticed that his RLE appears to be swollen, red, and painful that started two nights ago. Yesterday we was putting on his boots when he noticed that his right knee and thigh were completely swollen. The patient then started to feel pain. He describes the pain as tingling, burning which he describes as severe nerve pain. He states the pain radiates towards his back. The patient has tried ibuprofen, tylenol, cream, ice packs, which does not help. He has used marijuana which provides the most relief. 

- The patient at times has bad spasms in his legs. He will punch them repeatedly which resolves the pain. He reports that he fell recently 2 weeks ago, but unsure how he fell. He did not have issues with swelling at the time. 

 

- The patient denies fevers/chills, chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain, troubles with urination, rash. He denies other joint involvement other than his back. He believes he may have a sacral ulcer

- The patient reports recent unprotected sexual activity 1 week ago. Denies swelling of testicles, purulence, drainage. Denies animal exposure, travel.

- Meds: baclofen 20 mg qid (expired), oxybutynin

 

- The patient went to an express med for further workup which was negative:

            - s/p IV steroid injection with improvement

- DVT US RLE (01/22/2025): negative

- XR RLE (01/23/2025): suprapatellar soft tissue effusion, nonspecific

- CBC: wnl

- CMP: wnl

 

Plan:

Differential diagnosis includes septic arthritis 2/2 gonorrheal illness vs. Sacral wound translocation, fracture related trauma 2/2 fall, trauma induced knee swelling, etc. Bedside ultrasound did not reveal significant effusion, however there could be a loculated effusion which could be diminished due to recent steroid injection. Given suspicion for septic arthritis vs. fracture, will obtain further imaging and labs

- ORDER CT RLE w contrast STAT

- ORDER ESR, CRP

- ORDER Coags

- ORDER STI panel, Syphilis

- Pain: REFILL baclofen

- Next visit: follow-up on CT RLE, patient may need joint effusion tapped as septic arthritis until proven otherwise. If patient without repeat labs, then consider empiric treatment with doxycycline.

 

#Concern for Sacral Ulcer

#Hx of paraplegia, T9 downward with motor/sensory deficits 2/2 gunshot wound (2021)

#Hx of neurogenic bladder 2/2 paraplegia (2021)

#Poor social support system

- Patient appears to not follow up with resources due to low motivation. Discussed through motivational interviewing the improvements patient could experience.

- Patient does not want to see PMNR due to "never being able to walk again anyways"

- Patient with sacral ulcer but not receiving further treatments. 

 

Plan:

- REFERRAL to Pain

- REFERRAL to Physical Therapy/Occupational Therapy

- REFERRAL to Social Work

- Next visit: reengage discussion on establishing care with PMNR, follow-up on Social work resources especially PT/OT, follow-up on Pain

 

#Depression

#Poor appetite

#History of Suicidal Attempt

- Patient reports feeling unmotivated. Patient reports not wanting to be in wheelchair anymore. Reports depression were before gunshot wound. Denies SI or intent to kill himself or hurt others

- Reports hx of suicide attempt by taking multiple bars and was brought to a mental hospital. He was discharged when he awoke

- Reports has tried outpatient mental health and medications but did not want to continue due to requiring group therapy.

- Reports hearing things that are complicated by destructive thoughts that include hurting other people including his baby-mama. These voices are from his own conscious and tell him he's a failure.

- Discussed safety plan of thoughts of hurting self or others with ED parameter

 

Plan: 

- REFERRAL Psychiatry

- ORDER Urine Drug Screen

- Patient declined medication, behavioral health therapy at this time

- Next visit: continue to engage in starting medical therapy

 

Review of Systems 

Constitutional:  Positive for appetite change and fatigue. Negative for chills and fever. 

Respiratory:  Negative for shortness of breath.  

Cardiovascular:  Positive for leg swelling. Negative for chest pain. 

Gastrointestinal:  Negative for abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. 

Genitourinary:  Negative for difficulty urinating (patient self caths), flank pain, frequency, penile discharge, penile pain, penile swelling, scrotal swelling and testicular pain. 

Musculoskeletal:  Positive for arthralgias, back pain, gait problem and joint swelling. 

Skin:  Negative for rash. 



Outpatient Medications:



PHYSICAL EXAM:

Physical Exam

Constitutional:  

   General: He is in acute distress (spasms will induce significant pain). 

   Appearance: Normal appearance. He is normal weight. He is not ill-appearing or toxic-appearing. 

   Comments: Patient appears cachectic and malnourished 

HENT: 

   Head: Atraumatic. 

Eyes: 

   Extraocular Movements: Extraocular movements intact. 

Cardiovascular: 

   Rate and Rhythm: Tachycardia present. 

   Pulses: Normal pulses. 

   Heart sounds: Normal heart sounds. 

Pulmonary: 

   Effort: Pulmonary effort is normal. No respiratory distress. 

   Breath sounds: Normal breath sounds. No wheezing, rhonchi or rales. 

Abdominal: 

   General: Abdomen is flat. Bowel sounds are normal. There is no distension. 

   Palpations: Abdomen is soft. 

   Tenderness: There is no abdominal tenderness. There is no right CVA tenderness, left CVA tenderness, guarding or rebound. 

Genitourinary:

   Penis: Normal.  

   Testes: Normal. 

   Prostate: Normal. 

   Rectum: Normal. 

Musculoskeletal:    

   General: Swelling and tenderness present. 

   Right lower leg: Edema present. 

   Comments: Patient with Right knee warm, swollen, but not erythematous

Tender in the form of "nerve pain" but not necessarily to touch in setting of paraplegia

Unable to examen sacral wound 2/2 pain

Patient with bruising of Right inner thigh, appears due to DVT US exam vs. Trauma. 

No reported penile swelling, tenderness, discharged, assessed by faculty Dr. Rezigh 

Skin:

   Findings: No rash. 

Neurological: 

   Mental Status: He is alert and oriented to person, place, and time. Mental status is at baseline. 

   Comments: Patient with intact motor/sensory BUE

Loss of motor/sensory T9 down

Notable shaking with spasm onset 



I called patient in a HIPAA protected phone call twice that went straight to voicemail

 

Called mother who confirmed the patient's name and date of birth in a HIPAA protected phone call.  She stated that the patient was not at home right now.

 

The mother reported that she went to RBG Clinic today 01/24/2025 at 1100 with her son to obtain labs for which they gave blood work and urine sample. She stated that her son had not scheduled his CT RLE scan yet. The mother also stated that the son had been taking his home baclofen dose of 20mg qid up until it expired this past week. She stated that there was no concerns with his refilled medication.

 

I informed the mother that we will reach out on Monday or Tuesday for follow-up on labs, baclofen dose, imaging, and possible treatments. The mother expressed understanding and was without further questions.



GOT SEEN THE FOLLOWING WEEK for close follow-up in our clinic

HPI

 

R knee effusion: 

Patient seen last week for R knee effusion concerns that were seen on xray of the RLE. Patient had a mechanical fall 2 weeks ago landing on R knee and patient started to have R knee swelling and pain last week. Originally went to ER and given IV steroids and Xray RLE showed suprapatellar effusion and DVT US RLE negative. Pain and swelling did not improved and then was seen in clinic. POCUS done and without evidence of significant effusion in the suprapatellar recess. Patient has unprotected sexual encounter one week prior to start of R knee pain and swelling. STD testing still pending. Syphilis negative. CRP isolated high. Patient notes since last visit in clinic on 1/23/2025, R knee swelling and pain has decreased. Not taking any OTC pan medications.  Does endorse some cloudy urine and foul odor. 

 

 

#R knee swelling/effusion, improving

Patient seen last week for R knee effusion concerns that were seen on xray of the RLE. Patient had a mechanical fall 2 weeks ago landing on R knee and patient started to have R knee swelling and pain last week. Originally went to ER and given IV steroids and Xray RLE showed suprapatellar effusion and DVT US RLE negative. Pain and swelling did not improve and then was seen in clinic 1/23/2025. POCUS done and without evidence of significant effusion in the suprapatellar recess. Patient has unprotected sexual encounter one week prior to start of R knee pain and swelling. STD testing still pending. Syphilis negative. CRP isolated high. Patient notes since last visit in clinic on 1/23/2025, R knee swelling and pain has decreased. Ddx includes MSK injury from fall from wheelchair. Septic arthritis possible but at this point seems unlikely given symptom improvement, lack of systemic signs, no white count, and isolated high CRP level. CT RLE scheduled in 2 days, and if effusion present on CT scan and CRP uptrending then will treat as septic arthritis as presumed gonococcal arthritis given unprotected sexual encounter and still pending STD labs.

- CT RLE on 1/29/2025

- Repeat CRP today to see if up-trending 

- If effusion present on CT scan and CRP uptrending then will treat as septic arthritis as presumed gonococcal arthritis given unprotected sexual encounter and still pending STD labs

- POCUS done 1/23/2025 and without evidence of significant effusion in the suprapatellar recess.

- DVT US RLE (01/22/2025): negative

-  XR RLE (01/23/2025): suprapatellar soft tissue effusion, nonspecific

- STD panel pending 

- Syphilis negative 

- ESR, coags, CBC, UDS negative 

 

#Foul Urine Odor 

Over the past week with brown urine appearance yesterday

- U/A with reflex culture 

 

#Paraplegia, T9 downward with motor/sensory deficits 2/2 gunshot wound (2021) 

#Chronic spacticity 

- Referrals to PM&R, PT/OT, Social work, pain specialist pending 

- Continue Baclofen

 

#Sacral Ulcer 

- Wound care referral

 



CT scan eventually done a couple days later:



On follow-up a week later:

HPI: 

Alberto is a 22 y.o. male with paraplegia d/t GS 05/2021, muscle spasticity, neurogenic bowl, neurogenic bladder. 

Last visit in this clinic 01/27/2025 

Following with wound care for pressure ulcers - has follow up scheduled

Accompanied by grandmother today 

 

Leg swelling reported in Jan resolved - repeat CRP now within normal limits

 

Completing antibiotics for UTI - not finished yet

 

Continues to have significant pain in back 



Paraplegia at T9 level (CMS/HCC)

Chronic bilateral low back pain without sciatica

Bilateral thoracic back pain, unspecified chronicity

- issue since GSW 

- recommend following up with PM&R

- increase gabapentin to 600 mg nightly 

- recommend to stop taking non-prescribed medications with concerns for safety 

- provided information for pain medicine appointment 

-     gabapentin (NEURONTIN) 300 MG capsule; Take 2 capsules (600 mg) by mouth every night.

-     ketorolac (TORADOL) injection 30 mg

Hematoma

- resolved 

Neurogenic bladder

- continue oxybutynin 

- recent positive nitrites in urine concern for UTI on antibiotics he needs to finsih 

- consider following up with urology 

Nail dystrophy

- podiatry referral at request 

- toenails are not in good condition -concern for onychomycosis 

-     Ambulatory Referral to Podiatry (Internal - UT); Future



(L): Data is abnormally low

(H): Data is abnormally high



(L): Data is abnormally low

(H): Data is abnormally high



(H): Data is abnormally high



!: Data is abnormal



CT RLE w/ IV contrast findings 1/29/25:

FINDINGS:

Anatomic alignment. Normal mineralization. No acute fracture or dislocation. No joint effusion.

 

There is a nonspecific curvilinear peripherally enhancing fluid collection in the deep aspect of the anterior compartment of the thigh with horseshoe shaped similar to that of the vastus intermedius, medial predominant measuring up to approximately 3-4 cm in AP dimension, 1-1.5 cm in transverse dimension and at least 20 cm in craniocaudal dimension (incompletely visualized in the long axis). No intrinsic gas or radiopaque foreign body. However, there does appear to be subtle extension anteriorly between the vastus medialis and rectus femoris.

 

Remaining soft tissues are unremarkable.

 

IMPRESSION:

Nonspecific peripherally enhancing fluid collection in the deep aspect of the anterior compartment of the right thigh, favored to represent hematoma over abscess; recommend historical correlation and consider fluid aspiration for further evaluation.



XR 1/23/25: FINDINGS:

Anatomic alignment. Normal mineralization. No acute fracture or dislocation. No joint effusion.

 

There is a nonspecific curvilinear peripherally enhancing fluid collection in the deep aspect of the anterior compartment of the thigh with horseshoe shaped similar to that of the vastus intermedius, medial predominant measuring up to approximately 3-4 cm in AP dimension, 1-1.5 cm in transverse dimension and at least 20 cm in craniocaudal dimension (incompletely visualized in the long axis). No intrinsic gas or radiopaque foreign body. However, there does appear to be subtle extension anteriorly between the vastus medialis and rectus femoris.

 

Remaining soft tissues are unremarkable.

 

IMPRESSION:

Nonspecific peripherally enhancing fluid collection in the deep aspect of the anterior compartment of the right thigh, favored to represent hematoma over abscess; recommend historical correlation and consider fluid aspiration for further evaluation.



1/22/25 RLE DVT ulrrasound: negativeUTHSCSA Cases

Daily MJ use, never smoker, no current EtOH, sexually active, no protection

